<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta content="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
<link href="../Styles/stylesheet.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
<link href="../Styles/page_styles.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
<title>張愛玲全集：秧歌</title>
</head>

<body>
<div class="chapter">
<div class="heading">
<h2>About <i>Eileen Chang</i></h2>
</div>
<div class="section">
<p>Eileen Chang (Chang Ai-Ling) was an immensely popular novelist and short story writer and a giant of Chinese literature. Born in Shanghai in 1920, she was an individualist in an insistently conformist society, and a cosmopolitan artist in a provincial literary landscape. She came to the United States in 1955 and died a recluse and a cult figure in Los Angeles in 1995. Her <i>New York Times</i> obituary quoted experts who compared her favorably with such widely acclaimed writers as Eudora Welty, Flannery O’Connor, and Franz Kafka, and said she would have won a Nobel Prize had it not been for the political division between the Nationalist and Communist Chinese.</p>
<p>Despite her great fame among Chinese-language readers around the world, her work has been nearly unavailable in English in this country for many years. With the reissue of <i>The Rice-Sprout Song</i>, this important writer is introduced to a new generation of readers who will appreciate Chang ’s elegant and restrained prose style, her harrowing analyses of human motives, and her keen understanding of desire, loneliness, and hunger both physical and metaphysical.</p>
<br/>

<p class="left">“Eileen Chang beautifully and movingly evokes 20th-century China and the hearts and minds of Chinese women.”</p>
<p class="right">Jung Chang, author of <i>Wild Swans: Three Daughters of China</i></p>
<br/>

<p class="left">“(Chang) is arguably the finest prose stylist of the 20th century. I remember her as a haunted woman of extraordinary sensitivity and almost painful shyness. In our literary terrain, I am somehow reminded of Jean Rhys.”</p>
<p class="right">Frederic Wakeman, Director, Institute of East Asian Studies, University of California, Berkeley</p>
<br/>

<p class="left">“<i>The Rice-Sprout Song</i>, a novel about rural life in the early period of the People’s Republic of China, offers descriptions that are not only compelling but remarkable for their uncompromised insights into the ironies of political ideology.”</p>
<p class="right">Rey Chow, University of California, Irvine</p>
<br/>

<p class="left">David Der-wei Wang is Professor of Chinese Literature, Columbia University, and editor of <i>Running Wild: Contemporary Chinese Fiction</i> (1994).</p>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>