<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta content="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
<link href="../Styles/stylesheet.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
<link href="../Styles/page_styles.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
<title>張愛玲全集：秧歌</title>
</head>

<body>
<div class="chapter">
<div class="heading">
<h2>9</h2>
</div>
<div class="section">
<p>The Women’s Association was going to hold a meeting. As usual, Moon Scent went next door to pick up Sister-in-Law Gold Have Got.</p>
<p>“She is washing clothes by the stream,” said Big Aunt.</p>
<p>After Moon Scent left, Big Aunt grumbled after her, “If you want someone to go, go yourself. No, you must drag others along. Other people have work to do. In this family the old ones are too old and the young ones too young. Who is going to do the work if she goes to meetings all day long? Calling for her all the time, like calling the soul of the dying back to the body. You still aren’t the Chairman of the Women’s Association. You need not be so anxious, dropping in at every house to drag other people to the meeting. Husband and wife -husband and wife certainly think alike. So you are a Labor Model.” She switched over to Gold Root, her voice going higher and higher. “People just give you a few words of praise and you lose your head. You do not stop to think: where is the nine <i>tan</i> of grain you reaped? Where has it gone to? You end up just as empty-bellied as we are.”</p>
<p>“All right, all right, say no more!” whispered Big Uncle.</p>
<p>“<i>Ai</i>, the young people are such fools!” Big Aunt sighed as she sat there plaiting flax. “They cannot hear a few kind words without wanting to lay down their lives for somebody. They willingly dig out their hearts and dig out their livers. I, the old woman, have lived longer than you people. Just the salt I have eaten would make a bigger pile than all the rice you have put in your bellies. The things I have seen are many. One moment this army comes; one moment that army comes. After the army come the bandits. And this time <b>it is worse than any bandits. You cant even bury four ounces of millet underground and get away with it.</b> Yes, they always know.”</p>
<p>“<i>Hai-yah</i>, Old Lord Heaven, what kind of talk is this?” cried Big Uncle. “Gone crazy today!”</p>
<p>At this Big Aunt started to shout, “Don’t be afraid, old man! Don’t be afraid! I won’t get you involved. Let them report me. Let them gain credits. No matter how anxious to please Comrade Wong -they still end up just as empty-bellied as we are.”</p>
<p>Big Uncle finally gave up trying to stop her. He knew that Gold Root was in the hills gathering firewood and that Comrade Ku had gone to town to buy the food he ate in secret. They had seen Gold Root going out. But it happened that he had returned without being seen and was in his room all this time.</p>
<p>Moon Scent also had come back because she forgot to tell Gold Root to keep an eye on the child and see that she did not slip into Comrade Ku’s room. As soon as she entered the courtyard she heard Big Aunt’s voice yelling, but she could not make out whether she was quarreling with the old man or scolding her daughter-in-law. When she came to her own room, she found Gold Root standing near the doorway in a gangling, awkward pose.</p>
<p>She jerked her head toward next door. “Quarreling with whom?” she asked.</p>
<p>He looked at her uncomprehendingly.</p>
<p>Then she heard what Big Aunt was shouting. Gold Root’s face was harsh with pain. She looked away from it quickly. She hated that old woman for hurting him.</p>
<p>“Big Aunt, don’t talk so loudly!” she shouted across the wall. “It is all right if we hear you. But what if somebody else hears and goes to report you? You would blame it on us and we would never be able to clear ourselves.”</p>
<p>“Don’t think I am afraid of being reported!” Big Aunt shouted back. “An old woman like me is a candle in the wind and frost on the tiles -I cannot last long anyhow. But you people who are young and have a future to think of -do not blacken your heart and do harm to others or you would not come to a good end.”</p>
<p>“All right, all right, say one sentence less,” urged Big Uncle.</p>
<p>“Calling other people black-hearted for no reason,” yelled Moon Scent. “An elder not behaving like an elder -living to a great age, but all your days seem to have been lived out by a dog.”</p>
<p>“You dare scold me! Am I someone whom you might scold?” her aunt cried out. “Crazy! Do you eat rice or do you eat dung?”</p>
<p>“Everybody say one sentence less,” pleaded Big Uncle.</p>
<p>“Let it go at that,” said Gold Root to his wife.</p>
<p>“The dead hag!” hissed Moon Scent. “Why do you not die, you dead hag?”</p>
<p>“Ah, you women!” Gold Root said disgustedly.</p>
<p>“Go and report me! Get my daughter-in-law to report me to the Women’s Association! Go ahead!”</p>
<p>“You never will stop -never will stop,” said Big Uncle between clenched teeth, and there was a sound of scuffling and muffled blows.</p>
<p>“All right, beat me! Beat me!” wailed Big Aunt. “At my age, with my grandsons so big already, you still beat me? Beat me to death then! I don’t want to live! I haven’t the face to go on living.”</p>
<p>Things clattered to the ground as Big Aunt rolled all over the room howling with grief.</p>
<p>“Go and make peace between them,” said Gold Root to Moon Scent.</p>
<p>“I certainly am not going.”</p>
<p>Gold Root finally went himself. “All right, all right, Big Uncle.” He pulled the old man aside. “At your age, and married for so many years -people will laugh.”</p>
<p>Big Aunt sat on the ground boo-hooing. Stray short hair, white and tough like cats’ whiskers, fell over her cheeks.</p>
<p>Panting with his exertions, Big Uncle turned a desperately beseeching face to Gold Root and tried to explain how this madness suddenly came over her and it really had nothing to do with Moon Scent. Gold Root managed to shake him off. When he came home the room was empty. Moon Scent had gone to the meeting.</p>
<p>From that day onward Big Aunt and Moon Scent ceased speaking to each other.</p>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>